---
marp: true
title: Introduction to CodeQL
description: Explanation on what CodeQL is, how it works, and how to use it effectively for static analysis.
author: Daniel Soden
theme: gaia
pagination: true
size: 16:9
lang: en
footer: "CodeQL • Static Analysis"
---

<style>
  table {
    font-size: 0.5em;
    width: 100%;
    max-width: 100%;
    border-collapse: collapse;
    table-layout: fixed;
    overflow: hidden;
    word-break: break-word;
  }
  td, th {
    overflow: hidden;
    text-overflow: ellipsis;
  }
</style>

# CodeQL

## Author: Daniel Soden

---

# What is CodeQL?

- CodeQL is a semantic code analysis tool acquired by GitHub, created by Semmle.

- Allows developers and security researchersnto write queries,
  find bugs,vulnerabilities, and code-quality issues.

- CodeQL has two states on a repo: Default Configuration and Advanced (Custom)
  configuration.

---

# CodeQL Default COnfiguration vs Advanced Configuration

## Comparison

| Aspect | Default Configuration | Advanced Configuration |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Configuration Options | No Configuration File | CodeQL.yml file describing actions taken in code scanning |
| Query Suites | Can only use either a default or extended query suite | Any query suite can be used such as security-and-quality or even security-experimental |
| Setup | Little setup effort | Requires exhaustive custom yml file with build steps |

---

# Phase 1 - Default configuration

- As of now on all public repositories, CodeQL is enabled by default.

- This means that if you have a public repository, CodeQL will automatically run
  on it without any additional configuration.

- For private repositories, CodeQL is not enabled by default, and you will need
  to set it up manually and it would require additional costs.

---

# Phase 2 - Default Configuration -> Extended Suite

- Security extended is a built in set of CodeQL queries that includes:

  - All default queries
  - Extra low precision and low severity queries
  - Experimental queries

- Allows for broader coverage of potential vulnerabilities than the default
  suite
- Useful for security-focused teams that perfer maximum depth and are willing
  to handle additional alerts

---

# Notes on Issues found with Security-Extended and Advanced Configuration

- The CodeQL Extended and Advanced suite can produce a large number of alerts,
  including some false positives.

- It may require more effort to triage and manage the alerts generated by the
  security-extended suite compared to the default suite.

- With the new setup whether it be for the exteended or advanced configuration,
  it is up to the code owners themselves to decide whether or not to dismiss alerts
  or not.

- These suites err on the side of caution so issues like string operations,
  library calls and typing are more likely to be flagged as potential
  vulnerabilities, even if they may not be exploitable in practice

---

# How will we implement extended suite?

- To start the rollout of the extended suite first we need to add the code
  scanning endpoints for:
  - Editing Default configuration
  - Getting Default configuration
- And record metadata for the default configuration and the extended configuration.

---

# Metadata for CodeQL configuration

## Default configution metadata

```json
"codeql":"default",
```

## Disabling CodeQL metadata

```json
"codeql":"disabled",
```
## Extended configuration metadata

```json
"codeql":"extended",
```
## Advanced configuration metadata

```json
"codeql":"advanced",
```

